README.md, before:

# Comprezz

A single-file [gzip/deflate compression library](https://bkataru.bearblog.dev/comprezzzig/) for Zig, based on code from the Zig 0.14 standard library.

## Features

- **Full LZ77 + Huffman implementation** - Complete deflate algorithm implementation
- **Configurable compression levels** - Fast, default, best, and levels 4-9
- **Gzip format** - Proper headers and CRC32 checksums
- **Library + CLI** - Use as a dependency or command-line tool
- **Zero dependencies** - Self-contained implementation

## Installation

Add to your `build.zig.zon`:

```zig
.{
    .name = "your-project",
    .version = "0.1.0",
    .dependencies = .{
        .comprezz = .{
            .path = "path/to/comprezz",
        },
    },
}
```

And in your `build.zig`:

```zig
const comprezz = b.dependency("comprezz", .{
    .target = target,
    .optimize = optimize,
});
exe.root_module.addImport("comprezz", comprezz.module("comprezz"));
```

## Library Usage

### Basic Compression

```zig
const std = @import("std");
const comprezz = @import("comprezz");

pub fn main() !void {
    var compressed_buffer: [1024]u8 = undefined;
    var fixed_writer = std.Io.Writer.fixed(&compressed_buffer);
    
    const data = "Hello, World!";
    var input_buffer: [1024]u8 = undefined;
    @memcpy(input_buffer[0..data.len], data);
    var input_reader = std.Io.Reader.fixed(input_buffer[0..data.len]);
    
    try comprezz.compress(&input_reader, &fixed_writer, .{});
    
    // Find the end of compressed data by checking for non-zero bytes
    var written: usize = 0;
    for (compressed_buffer, 0..) |byte, i| {
        if (byte != 0) written = i + 1;
    }
    const compressed = compressed_buffer[0..written];
    _ = compressed;
}
```

### With File I/O

```zig
const std = @import("std");
const comprezz = @import("comprezz");

pub fn main() !void {
    const input_file = try std.fs.cwd().openFile("input.txt", .{});
    defer input_file.close();
    var input_reader = input_file.reader();
    
    const output_file = try std.fs.cwd().createFile("output.gz", .{});
    defer output_file.close();
    var output_writer = output_file.writer();
    
    try comprezz.compress(&input_reader, &output_writer, .{ .level = .best });
}
```

Available compression levels:
- `.fast` - Fastest compression
- `.default` - Good balance (default)
- `.best` - Best compression ratio
- `.level_4` through `.level_9` - Numeric compression levels

### Using the Compressor Type

For streaming compression, you can use the compressor API:

```zig
const std = @import("std");
const comprezz = @import("comprezz");

pub fn main() !void {
    const output_file = try std.fs.cwd().createFile("output.gz", .{});
    defer output_file.close();
    var output_writer = output_file.writer();
    
    var comp = try comprezz.compressor(&output_writer, .{ .level = .fast });
    
    const input_file = try std.fs.cwd().openFile("input.txt", .{});
    defer input_file.close();
    var input_reader = input_file.reader();
    
    try comp.compress(&input_reader);
    try comp.finish();
}
```

## CLI Usage

Build the CLI:

```bash
zig build
```

### Compress a File

```bash
comprezz input.txt -o output.gz
```

### Compression Levels

```bash
comprezz -l fast input.txt -o output.gz      # Fast compression
comprezz -l best input.txt -o output.gz      # Best compression
comprezz -l 9 input.txt -o output.gz        # Level 9
```

### From Stdin to Stdout

```bash
cat largefile.txt | comprezz > output.gz
```

### With File Input

```bash
comprezz largefile.txt > compressed.gz
```

## API Reference

### Functions

#### `compress`

```zig
pub fn compress(reader: *std.Io.Reader, writer: *std.Io.Writer, options: Options) !void
```

Compress data from a reader and write to a writer using gzip format.

- `reader`: Pointer to a `std.Io.Reader` interface
- `writer`: Pointer to a `std.Io.Writer` interface
- `options`: Compression options (level)

#### `compressor`

```zig
pub fn compressor(writer: *std.Io.Writer, options: Options) !Compressor
```

Create a compressor instance for streaming compression.

#### `Compressor`

```zig
pub const Compressor = Deflate(.gzip);
```

The Compressor type for gzip compression.

### Compression Levels

```zig
pub const Level = enum(u4) {
    fast,     // Fastest compression
    default,  // Default balance
    best,     // Best compression
    level_4,  // Level 4
    level_5,  // Level 5
    level_6,  // Level 6
    level_7,  // Level 7
    level_8,  // Level 8
    level_9,  // Level 9
};
```

### Options

```zig
pub const Options = struct {
    level: Level = .default,
};
```

## Building

### Build the Library and CLI

```bash
zig build
```

### Run Tests

```bash
zig build test
```

### Run the CLI

```bash
zig-out/bin/comprezz --help
```

## CLI Options

```
Usage: comprezz [OPTIONS] [INPUT_FILE]

Compress files using gzip format.

Options:
  -o, --output FILE      Output file (default: stdout)
  -l, --level LEVEL      Compression level: fast, default, best, or 4-9
  -h, --help            Show this help message
  -v, --version         Show version

If no INPUT_FILE is specified, reads from stdin.

Examples:
  comprezz input.txt -o output.gz
  comprezz -l best input.txt > output.gz
  cat file.txt | comprezz > file.gz
```

## License

This code is based on the Zig 0.14 standard library, which is part of the Zig project and uses the MIT license. This implementation maintains the same license.

## Credits

- Original implementation based on Zig 0.14 standard library
- Deflate algorithm implementation inspired by zlib and Go's compress/flate
- Adapted for Zig 0.15 compatibility with its new `std.Io.Reader` and `std.Io.Writer` interfaces

## Limitations

- **Compression only**: Decompression is not implemented yet
- **Single-threaded**: Uses a single-threaded implementation

## Contributing

This is a single-file library copied from Zig's standard library. For Zig language development, see [ziglang.org](https://ziglang.org/).

For issues or improvements to this specific package, open an issue on this GitHub repo and/or raise a PR.

Commit message:

docs: update README to clarify installation instructions and specify dependency URL format

README.md, after:

# Comprezz

A single-file [gzip/deflate compression library](https://bkataru.bearblog.dev/comprezzzig/) for Zig, based on code from the Zig 0.14 standard library.

## Features

- **Full LZ77 + Huffman implementation** - Complete deflate algorithm implementation
- **Configurable compression levels** - Fast, default, best, and levels 4-9
- **Gzip format** - Proper headers and CRC32 checksums
- **Library + CLI** - Use as a dependency or command-line tool
- **Zero dependencies** - Self-contained implementation

## Installation

Add to your `build.zig.zon` with:

```shell
$ zig fetch --save git+https://github.com/bkataru/comprezz.git
```

Which should update it as such:

```zig
.{
    .name = "your-project",
    .version = "0.1.0",
    .dependencies = .{
        .comprezz = .{
            .url = "https://github.com/bkataru/comprezz.git"
            .hash = "0a20xh2as0572jdhgb52..."
        },
    },
}
```

And in your `build.zig`:

```zig
const comprezz = b.dependency("comprezz", .{
    .target = target,
    .optimize = optimize,
});
exe.root_module.addImport("comprezz", comprezz.module("comprezz"));
```

## Library Usage

### Basic Compression

```zig
const std = @import("std");
const comprezz = @import("comprezz");

pub fn main() !void {
    var compressed_buffer: [1024]u8 = undefined;
    var fixed_writer = std.Io.Writer.fixed(&compressed_buffer);
    
    const data = "Hello, World!";
    var input_buffer: [1024]u8 = undefined;
    @memcpy(input_buffer[0..data.len], data);
    var input_reader = std.Io.Reader.fixed(input_buffer[0..data.len]);
    
    try comprezz.compress(&input_reader, &fixed_writer, .{});
    
    // Find the end of compressed data by checking for non-zero bytes
    var written: usize = 0;
    for (compressed_buffer, 0..) |byte, i| {
        if (byte != 0) written = i + 1;
    }
    const compressed = compressed_buffer[0..written];
    _ = compressed;
}
```

### With File I/O

```zig
const std = @import("std");
const comprezz = @import("comprezz");

pub fn main() !void {
    const input_file = try std.fs.cwd().openFile("input.txt", .{});
    defer input_file.close();
    var input_reader = input_file.reader();
    
    const output_file = try std.fs.cwd().createFile("output.gz", .{});
    defer output_file.close();
    var output_writer = output_file.writer();
    
    try comprezz.compress(&input_reader, &output_writer, .{ .level = .best });
}
```

Available compression levels:
- `.fast` - Fastest compression
- `.default` - Good balance (default)
- `.best` - Best compression ratio
- `.level_4` through `.level_9` - Numeric compression levels

### Using the Compressor Type

For streaming compression, you can use the compressor API:

```zig
const std = @import("std");
const comprezz = @import("comprezz");

pub fn main() !void {
    const output_file = try std.fs.cwd().createFile("output.gz", .{});
    defer output_file.close();
    var output_writer = output_file.writer();
    
    var comp = try comprezz.compressor(&output_writer, .{ .level = .fast });
    
    const input_file = try std.fs.cwd().openFile("input.txt", .{});
    defer input_file.close();
    var input_reader = input_file.reader();
    
    try comp.compress(&input_reader);
    try comp.finish();
}
```

## CLI Usage

Build the CLI:

```bash
zig build
```

### Compress a File

```bash
comprezz input.txt -o output.gz
```

### Compression Levels

```bash
comprezz -l fast input.txt -o output.gz      # Fast compression
comprezz -l best input.txt -o output.gz      # Best compression
comprezz -l 9 input.txt -o output.gz        # Level 9
```

### From Stdin to Stdout

```bash
cat largefile.txt | comprezz > output.gz
```

### With File Input

```bash
comprezz largefile.txt > compressed.gz
```

## API Reference

### Functions

#### `compress`

```zig
pub fn compress(reader: *std.Io.Reader, writer: *std.Io.Writer, options: Options) !void
```

Compress data from a reader and write to a writer using gzip format.

- `reader`: Pointer to a `std.Io.Reader` interface
- `writer`: Pointer to a `std.Io.Writer` interface
- `options`: Compression options (level)

#### `compressor`

```zig
pub fn compressor(writer: *std.Io.Writer, options: Options) !Compressor
```

Create a compressor instance for streaming compression.

#### `Compressor`

```zig
pub const Compressor = Deflate(.gzip);
```

The Compressor type for gzip compression.

### Compression Levels

```zig
pub const Level = enum(u4) {
    fast,     // Fastest compression
    default,  // Default balance
    best,     // Best compression
    level_4,  // Level 4
    level_5,  // Level 5
    level_6,  // Level 6
    level_7,  // Level 7
    level_8,  // Level 8
    level_9,  // Level 9
};
```

### Options

```zig
pub const Options = struct {
    level: Level = .default,
};
```

## Building

### Build the Library and CLI

```bash
zig build
```

### Run Tests

```bash
zig build test
```

### Run the CLI

```bash
zig-out/bin/comprezz --help
```

## CLI Options

```
Usage: comprezz [OPTIONS] [INPUT_FILE]

Compress files using gzip format.

Options:
  -o, --output FILE      Output file (default: stdout)
  -l, --level LEVEL      Compression level: fast, default, best, or 4-9
  -h, --help            Show this help message
  -v, --version         Show version

If no INPUT_FILE is specified, reads from stdin.

Examples:
  comprezz input.txt -o output.gz
  comprezz -l best input.txt > output.gz
  cat file.txt | comprezz > file.gz
```

## License

This code is based on the Zig 0.14 standard library, which is part of the Zig project and uses the MIT license. This implementation maintains the same license.

## Credits

- Original implementation based on Zig 0.14 standard library
- Deflate algorithm implementation inspired by zlib and Go's compress/flate
- Adapted for Zig 0.15 compatibility with its new `std.Io.Reader` and `std.Io.Writer` interfaces

## Limitations

- **Compression only**: Decompression is not implemented yet
- **Single-threaded**: Uses a single-threaded implementation

## Contributing

This is a single-file library copied from Zig's standard library. For Zig language development, see [ziglang.org](https://ziglang.org/).

For issues or improvements to this specific package, open an issue on this GitHub repo and/or raise a PR.
